# Compilers Project

## GROUP: COMP2022-1A

| Name | Number | Grade | Contribution |
| -----| ------ | ----- | ------------ |
| Catarina Oliveira Pires | 201907925 | 20 | 25% |  
| Diogo Luís Henriques Costa | 201906731 | 20 | 25% |
| Francisco José Barbosa Marques Colino | 201905405 | 20 | 25% |
| Pedro Miguel Jesus da Silva | 201907523 | 20 | 25% |

GLOBAL Grade of the project: 20


## SUMMARY:

This tool compiles `J--` source files to Java bytecode.  

To compile and install the program, run ``gradle installDist``.  
After compiled, the program can be run using  ``comp2022-1A.bat`` (Windows) or ``comp2022-1A`` (Linux).

### Program invocation:
```
./comp2022-1a [-r=<num>] [-o] [-d] -i=<input_file.jmm>
```

Where:
- `-r` option directs the program to only use at most `<num>` local variables of the JVM.
    - If num = -1, it will use as many as needed.
    - If num =  0, it will use the minimum possible.
- `-o` option directs the program to perform code optimizations.
- `-d` option enables additional output related to the compilation process.
- `-i` is used to pass the path to the `J--` source file to compile.

The program will parse the input arguments to check if they are valid.  

If so, it will continue to parse the ``input_file.jmm``, build the symbol table,
perform semantic analysis, optimize at the AST level if option `-o` was used,
generate intermediate code (OLLIR), perform register allocation if option `-r` was used and
generate JVM code. Then it proceeds to save in the ``generated-files`` directory the `.j` file
with the Jasmin code, and a compiled `.class` file.

Note that at any stage, if errors are detected the compilation process aborts and the error is
displayed.


## SEMANTIC ANALYSIS: (Refer the semantic rules implemented by your tool.)




## CODE GENERATION:

### Abstract Syntax Tree

The source code is parsed accordingly to the grammar defined in
[JmmGrammar.jj](javacc/JmmGrammar.jj).  
From the parsing stage, results an AST with several annotations such as name
of ids and values of literals.


#### Optimizations (-o)

After the AST is generated, and before OLLIR is generated, three visitors are executed
in order while they are changing the AST:
1. [ConstPropagationVisitor.java](src/pt/up/fe/comp/ollir/optimization/optimizers/ConstPropagationVisitor.java)
2. [ConstFoldingVisitor.java](src/pt/up/fe/comp/ollir/optimization/optimizers/ConstFoldingVisitor.java)
3. [DeadCodeEliminationVisitor.java](src/pt/up/fe/comp/ollir/optimization/optimizers/DeadCodeEliminationVisitor.java)

The first substitutes local variables that can be replaced by constant values.  
The second performs constant folding in `not` operations and`binary` operations, including short-cut evaluation of
the `&&` operation.
The third checks if `if` and `while` conditions are immediate values and if so eliminates the code accordingly.
Note that in the case of `<` condition, if its the operands are the same id, the condition evaluates to false, and
dead code can be eliminated.

Also additional care is taken in order to detect the value of while loop conditions at the start of execution,
so that during OLLIR generation the while loop can be promoted to a do-while, avoiding the need of a goto instruction
and a label.

This is done by duplicating the while condition in here before the optimization loop:
[WhileConditionDuplicatorVisitor.java](src/pt/up/fe/comp/ollir/optimization/optimizers/WhileConditionDuplicatorVisitor.java)  
And after checking its value:
[DoWhileAnnotatorVisitor.java](src/pt/up/fe/comp/ollir/optimization/optimizers/DoWhileAnnotatorVisitor.java)

### OO-based Low-Level Intermediate Representation (OLLIR)

OLLIR code is generated by visiting the AST. This intermediate representation translates
the AST to a 3 address code representation. This translation is performed by
[OllirGenerator.java](src/pt/up/fe/comp/ollir/OllirGenerator.java).


#### Optimizations (-o)

During the generation of OLLIR, elimination of unnecessary GOTOs is performed accordingly to the annotation generated as
previously stated in while loops.  


### JASMIN

Jasmin code is generated from the OLLIR code in [JasminBackender.java](src/pt/up/fe/comp/jmm/jasmin/JasminBackender.java).  
Everything is properly translated. Also stack limits and local limits are being calculated.


#### Optimizations

At this level, instruction selection is performed:
- x = x + `<const>` => iinc x `<const>`
- if (x < 0) => iflt
- if (0 < x) => ifgt
- if (!x) => ifeq
- if (x) => ifne
- if (x < y) => if_icmplt

Also, load and store instructions were selected:  
e.g. iload_0, bipush 10, iconst_0...


## PROS:

Everything proposed was implemented, including both -o and -r optimizations as described above.  
The [-d] option is very verbose which is very useful when trying to understand the compilation process.  

Furthermore, shortcut evaluation was performed on `&&` as shown in this test:
[ShortCutAnd.jmm](test/fixtures/public/selfMade/ShortCutAnd.jmm).  


## CONS:

We didn't sanitize variable names that are reserved in OLLIR like "array".
